[17743] TCP over WAN using Discovery Server (#135)
eProsima/vulcanexus: docs/rst/tutorials/core/deployment/ds_wan_tcp/ds_wan_tcp.rst

Internet could be considered a WAN itself.

Discovery Server
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The :ref:`Discovery Server <vulcanexus_discovery_server>` is a Fast DDS enabled feature that procures an alternative discovery mechanism to the default ROS 2 discovery mechanism, `Simple Discovery Protocol (SDP) <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/discovery/simple.html#simple-disc-settings>`_, which is served by the DDS implementations according to the DDS specification.
Whereas SDP (right figure) provides automatic out-of-the-box discovery by leveraging multicast, ROS 2 Discovery Server (left figure) provides a centralized hub for managing discovery which drastically reduces network bandwidth utilization when compared to SDP, since the nodes, publishers, and subscribers, only discovered those remote ROS 2 entities with which they need to communication (as opposed to the SDP model where everyone knows about each other).

.. contents::
    :local:
    :backlinks: none
    :depth: 1

.. figure:: /rst/figures/intro/discovery-server.svg
    :align: center
    :width: 70%

    Comparison of Discovery Server and Simple Discovery Protocol mechanisms

> A *server* is a context to which the *clients* (and maybe other *servers*) send their discovery information.

Author: Thanks!

  The default gateway of this container is redirected to the discovery *server*, which would behave as a router too.

* ``ros_listener``: the container is included in the created ``listener_net``.
  The IP address has not been set manually, but the IP assigned by default would be ``10.2.0.2``.
  As the previous container, the environment variable ``FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE`` is set with the ``node_configuration.xml`` and ``ROS_DISCOVERY_SERVER`` is set with the discovery *server* information ``"TCPv4:[10.1.1.1]:10111"``.
  The default gateway of this container is redirected to the *router* container.

* ``fast_dds_discovery_server``: the container is included in both created ``talker_net`` and ``wan_net``.
  The IP addresses has been set manually as ``10.1.1.1`` in the ``talker_net``, and ``10.3.1.1`` in the ``wan_net``.
  The default gateway of this container is redirected to the *router* container.
  The ``iptables`` has been configured to redirect any traffic from any network and interface.

* ``router``: the container is included in both created ``listener_net`` and ``wan_net``.

>   The IP addresses has been set manually as ``10.2.1.1`` in the ``listener_net``, and ``10.3.2.1`` in the ``wan_net``.

Reviewer: (I overlooked that the same comment would also apply in line 209)

  The default gateway of this container is redirected to the discovery *server* container.
  The ``iptables`` has been configured to redirect traffic from any network and interface.

Please, include the following ``compose.yml`` file in the workspace.

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/ds_wan_tcp_tutorial/compose.yml
    :language: yaml

Run the example
---------------

Make sure that the workspace has been set with all the previous files, and the docker networks and ``iptables`` have been set too.

.. code-block:: bash

    ├ <workspace>
    ·  ├ compose.yml
    ·  ├ Dockerfile
    ·  ├ node_configuration.xml
    ·  └ server_configuration.xml

As explained in the :ref:`tutorials_deployment_ds_wan_tcp_overview`, the expected behavior is that both ``talker`` and ``listener`` are able to connect to the discovery *server*, discover each other, and send and receive (respectively) the *HelloWorld* example messages over the WAN simulation using TCP.

Run the example:

.. code-block:: bash

    cd <workspace>
    docker compose -f compose.yml up --build

> .. note::

Reviewer: I guess it would be worth mentioning at somewhere in the tutorial that when deploying under a real scenario, the proper firewall/router configuration rules needs to be added.

Server side
^^^^^^^^^^^

The following XML configuration describes the discovery *server* TCP configuration required.
Create a workspace to run the tutorial, and include an XML configuration file named ``server_configuration.xml`` with the below code.

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/ds_wan_tcp_tutorial/server_configuration.xml
    :language: XML

Note that in the discovery configuration section, the profile is described as *server*, with a specific GUID prefix, and listening locator.
This listening locator is configured with the IP ``10.1.1.1``, which belongs to the ``talker`` node LAN, and its physical port is included in the transport descriptor as a known listening port.
This, along setting the wan address with the previously mentioned IP address, and setting the transport descriptor and locator types as ``TCPv4``, is crucial to ensure the TCP communication.

Client side
^^^^^^^^^^^

Include the following XML configuration in the workspace, and name the file as ``talker_configuration.xml``.

> This former configuration describes the ``talker`` node configuration for the EDP phase, and transport layer.

Reviewer: Not only EDP, for instance, the discovery server list is mostly used during `PDP`. We could refer as discovery phase in general

.. code-block:: bash

    cd <workspace>
    docker compose -f compose.yml up --build

Clean workspace
---------------

Stop the example by pressing ``Ctrl + C``, and stop the containers by running:

.. code-block:: bash

    docker compose -f compose.yml down

The docker networks, containers and images can be removed using the docker ``prune`` argument, but using the ``rm`` argument plus the identifiers would remove only the ones created for this tutorial:

.. code-block:: bash

    docker network rm listener_net talker_net wan_net
    docker container rm <workspace_name>_fast_dds_discovery_server_1 <workspace_name>_router_1 <workspace_name>_ros_listener_1 <workspace_name>_ros_talker_1
    docker image rm <workspace_name>_fast_dds_discovery_server:latest <workspace_name>_router:latest <workspace_name>_ros_listener:latest <workspace_name>_ros_talker:latest

.. note::

    The ``iptables`` configuration would be removed automatically each time the system gets rebooted.

TCP over real WAN with Discovery Server
---------------------------------------

The configuration of the docker networks and the ``iptables`` has been performed to simulate the WAN scenario locally.

> The requirements to achieve TCP communication over WAN with Discovery Server as EDP in a real deployment are launching the three elements of the communication (``talker``, ``listener`` and discovery *server*) with their corresponding XML configurations applied, and setting the proper firewall or router configuration rules.

Reviewer: I think that the Discovery Server acts as an entire discovery mechanism (including both PDP and EDP phases)

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/core/ds_wan_tcp/ds_wan_tcp_scenarios.svg
    :align: center
    :width: 70%

    Possible scenarios of TCP communication over WAN with Discovery Server

> Despite discovery *server* belongs or not to a *client* LAN, it is necessary to configure one port forwarding rule for the discovery *server*, and another port per every pair of *clients* communicating over the WAN, in either one of the sides.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Regardless of whether the discovery *server* belongs, or not, to one of the *clients'* LANs, it is necessary to configure one port forwarding rule for the discovery *server*, and another rule per every pair of *clients* communicating over the WAN, on either one of the sides.
```

If possible, deploy the different elements of the tutorial in different docker containers over WAN, following one of the possibilities displayed in the image above.

> For port forwarding configuration, see the `Configure transversal NAT on the network router <https://eprosima-dds-router.readthedocs.io/en/latest/rst/use_cases/wan_tcp.html#configure-transversal-nat-on-the-network-router>`_ section from *WAN communication over TCP* Fast DDS Router tutorial for further information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to address the port forwarding configuration, see the `Configure transversal NAT on the network router <https://eprosima-dds-router.readthedocs.io/en/latest/rst/use_cases/wan_tcp.html#configure-transversal-nat-on-the-network-router>`_ section from *WAN communication over TCP* Fast DDS Router tutorial for further information.
```

            docker run -td --name ros_listener --net host eprosima/vulcanexus:humble
            docker cp <workspace>/listener_configuration.xml ros_listener:/listener_configuration.xml
            docker exec -it ros_listener bash

            # run the listener client
            source /opt/ros/humble/setup.bash
            export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE="listener_configuration.xml"
            export ROS_DISCOVERY_SERVER="TCPv4:[<server public IP address>]:10111"
            ros2 run demo_nodes_cpp listener

    .. tab:: Talker

        .. code-block:: bash

            # run the talker docker image with the XML configuration
            docker run -td --name ros_talker --net host eprosima/vulcanexus:humble
            docker cp <workspace>/talker_configuration.xml ros_talker:/talker_configuration.xml
            docker exec -it ros_talker bash

            # run the talker client
            source /opt/ros/humble/setup.bash
            export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE="talker_configuration.xml"
            export ROS_DISCOVERY_SERVER="TCPv4:[<server public IP address>]:10111"
            ros2 run demo_nodes_cpp talker

> Make sure that the discovery *server* public IP has been properly set in all sections of the XML configuration files (in both ``listener_configuration.xml``, ``server_configuration.xml`` and ``talker_configuration.xml``), and also in the environment variable ``ROS_DISCOVERY_SERVER``.

Reviewer: If the discovery server is already specified in the XML configuration file, the `ROS_DISCOVERY_SERVER` environment variable can be omitted.

The host public IP address can be obtained by running:

.. code-block:: bash

    wget -qO- http://ipecho.net/plain | xargs echo

It is also required to set the WAN address for each *client* in the XML transport descriptor configuration.

> If any of them are hosted in the same LAN as the discovery *server*, then the IP address would be the same for both contexts (*client* and *server*).

Reviewer: NIT for being explicit
```suggestion
If any of them are hosted in the same LAN as the discovery *server*, then the WAN IP address would be the same for both contexts (*client* and *server*).
```

.. note::

>     If that is the case, then also make sure that the XML transport descriptor listening ports configured for each of them are different.

Reviewer: NIT I think it is better to repeat "If both *client* and *server* share the same LAN,...." although perhaps it is a little bit weird to refer to a case that could not be previously read (because of being a note).

Author: I can move it to normal body text and remove the `note` tag.

.. note::

    The requirements to achieve TCP communication over WAN with Discovery Server as EDP in a real deployment are simply launching the three elements of the communication (``talker``, ``listener`` and discovery *server*) with their corresponding XML configurations applied.

>     To do so in a real scenario, setting the proper firewall or router configuration rules should be considered.

Reviewer: Maybe we could add here a reference to the section [Configure transversal NAT on the network router
](https://eprosima-dds-router.readthedocs.io/en/latest/rst/use_cases/wan_tcp.html) of the *WAN over TCP DDS Router tutorial* to see an example on how to proceed

.. note::

    The requirements to achieve TCP communication over WAN with Discovery Server as EDP in a real deployment are launching the three elements of the communication (``talker``, ``listener`` and discovery *server*) with their corresponding XML configurations applied, and setting the proper firewall or router configuration rules.

>     This should be considered only for the discovery *server* and each ``talker`` node.

Reviewer: I think it would be worth being a little more specific here. We could add something like it should be necessary to configure one port forwarding rule for the server, and another port per every two clients communicating over the WAN (in either one of the sides).
